[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Welcome home.
Welcome home again.
Welcome home.
It feels like coming home.
I hear you, eternal soul.
You and I are one.
Seagull across the sky.
Colors in my eyes.
You and I fly.
World of peace has to come.
People dancing, people singing.
Harmony.
>> This is one of the greatest
places to go to live in peace
with other people, and to
share, and to live communally.
>> (SINGING)
--peace has to come.
People dancing--
>> It's our first gathering.
We're really excited to be here.
Good friends have told us
to come for many years,
and now we're here.
We finally arrived.
We're home.
It's awesome.
It's more than I
expected, that's for sure.
>> (SINGING) Welcome home again.
Welcome home.
Welcome home again.
World of peace has to come.
People dancing, people singing.
Harmony.
Welcome home.
Welcome home again.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
[PLEASANT GUITAR MUSIC]
>> To me, there's a something
very spiritual at the Rainbow
Gathering.
I call it my church, because
it's a place where we actually
live out the dreams
that I think all of us
have in terms of being
connected, loving, and sharing
as human beings.
>> I love the gatherings.
It's such a nice
place to center,
to find your spiritual side.
Just re-energize.
And it also is a very
spiritual happening.
I come to pray on the
4th for peace on Earth.
It's the highest gestalt of
energy that I find anywhere.
And the freedom that we
have and that we share here
in the Rainbow Family
is a love of our heart,
a love of the family,
a love of each other.
And we're really free
to do whatever we want,
but nobody wants
to hurt anybody,
because they all
love each other,
and we really feel this feeling.
And once you feel
nobody's on your case,
well, then you're
going to be free to be
nice to everybody else.
>> (SINGING) When I'm alone,
I consider the wonders
of creation.
I realize how insignificant
are the works of man.
If we could only learn to love
even those intensely hate,
then we would begin
to understand what
it is that we're out here for.
Love is the creator.
>> There's a lot of footwork,
a lot of preparation work that
goes into making one of these
amazing instantaneous events.
>> (SINGING) --is the creator.
>> We try to locate
the major facilities,
such as the comm unit, which
is a medical unit, the bakery,
which is a very high
foot traffic area.
The children's village.
To try to locate these
along a network of the most
obvious trails.
Sometimes we use old
deer and cow trails,
because those are already
broken into the forests.
And then these
trails get marked.
They get flagged.
They get beautiful,
colorful signs
so that people
can find their way
without having to hike through
every virgin hillside trampling
the grasses.
Because in the
end, what we do is
we come to all these
newly-made trails
between all this network
of camps and kitchens,
and we waterbar them.
We cover them over with
sticks, rocks, and duff.
We do what we call naturalizing.
And I would say that over the
last 35 years of gatherings,
if you return to the
old gathering sites,
there is no trace anywhere that
all these people were here.
And we came together, and we
envisioned this gathering.
And lo and behold, 35
years later, here it is.
15,000 20,000 people strong.
40 countries around the world.
>> All along here, you see all
these little branches along
the lower ends of the trees
that we broke off here.
That's called ladder fuels.
Just by our family
going through here,
we break off and burn a
lot of that ladder fuel
so that makes us less of
a fire hazard in here,
even for the loggers,
when they come in later.
A lot of the Earth,
as you know, is dying.
And we're trying to
bring the Earth back.
It's all done by individuals
operating their own free will,
but in fact, seeking to
help the community develop.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) 'Cause it
was many years ago today.
You know the Jah-ra
stuff arrived,
taught the musician to play.
They said they're playing
in a reggae matic style.
You know that's how we got
to rock it all the while.
Let me introduce to you,
I said, some musician
that you know for so many years.
This is the Rainbow
Family Band, and our work
will make it perfectly clear.
[GONGS REVERBERATING]
This is what we're going to do.
Uplift your brother.
Uplift your sister.
Said we got to help each other
regardless of one's color.
'Cause you know what?
Since time beginning,
man has done man wrong.
Nation enslaving nation,
how are we to get along.
We got to be aware that
we all are one people,
and everyone has got the right
to be an individual in love.
Love!
Peace!
And unity!
With equal rights and
justice, that brings liberty.
Love!
Peace!
And unity!
Because that's what it takes
to build this community.
Come on.
Free it up.
>> There's wonderful ways we've
applied technology and used it
to assist people.
We've taught people how to
develop springs, for example,
for remote living.
How to use solar energy.
How to provide clean sanitation.
Well, we search for
and develop springs
that are up on the top of
the peaks above the campers
so that we're camping
below the springs.
And we developed the springs and
run water line down from them.
We run anywhere from 4 to 8
miles of waterline a year,
down from the springs
to each of the kitchens,
and have taps at
each of the kitchens.
And from there, we use
a ceramic filter system
to provide good potable water
off that spring-fed source.
>> I think it's nice that we can
come to this land that we own,
and come freely.
One thing I like
about the event is
that all of your food
and water is free.
And it's all supported
by donations and work.
So I kind of come with
a strong work ethic.
[MUSIC - "OVER THE RAINBOW"]
>> Well, this is a 20-year
tradition of a pasta with pesto
dinner in the woods that we
make here at the Musical Veggie
Cafe.
>> Woo!
>> Woo-hoo!
>> This meal is made by many,
many hands, not just me.
I'm just one of them.
And so I hope you thank
everyone here, and this kitchen,
and all the great
facilities that are here
are what make it
able to happen today.
So anyway, thank
you all for coming.
I really hope you enjoy.
>> Oh, yeah!
[CHEERING]
[HUMMING]
>> Yeah!
Let's eat!
>> --work with, and they say,
what is this gathering thing?
Why do you want to be there?
What's it about?
And you're like,
I just have to go.
I have to get connected.
So everything you
do here matters.
We're relearning all
the ancient customs.
We're relearning
the ancient ways.
And we have to pass
those on to our children.
And that's why we're here.
[CHEERING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm letting the kids go--
>> One has mayonnaise
and one doesn't.
>> Is this vegan?
>> This has mayonnaise,
which means it's not vegan.
That isn't.
>> It's not vegan.
>> >> So, OK.
>> Not vegan, vegan.
>> No.
Right, yeah.
>> OK, what am I going to do?
>> You are going to--
>> Not vegan, vegan.
>> What's in it?
No.
There's 20,000 people at
the Rainbow Gathering.
Come on.
Not everyone's here.
[MUSIC - "OVER THE RAINBOW"]
[CHATTER]
>> That's soup.
>> Just a little tiny bit.
>> Two lines!
Two lines for the pesto.
[DRUMS MUSIC]
>> We have a three-station
dishwasher that's run by pumps
that are located underneath.
This system uses
half as much water
as actually getting the dishes
clean using wash buckets.
>> (SINGING) One
side is turning,
circled on our path
around the sun.
This mother is calling
her children home.
Light is returning even though
this is the darkest hour.
No one can hold back the dawn.
Let's keep it burning.
Let's keep the
flame of hope alive.
Make safe our journey
through the stars.
[LIGHT GUITAR MUSIC]
>> (SINGING) Bless the people.
Bless the people.
Bless the people
whose hearts are open.
'Cause love flows freely.
Like a mountain stream, the
gifts of kindness are like
the crystal drops of pure
water filling the ocean --
>> The rest of this
situation here around us is
my relationship to a group
of people that I met in 1988.
They call themselves
the Rainbow Family,
and since I got a belly
button, and since that's
the only requirement for being
a member of the Rainbow Family,
I guess I am one.
>> (SINGING) Bless the people
whose love flows freely,
who feel compassion
for all of humanity.
The ocean of love is
for everyone to share.
The whole world over, there's
people who really care.
Bless the people.
Bless the people
whose hearts are open.
>> It's a very amazing thing
when you get 20,000 people
together to attempt to
love each other as family.
There's a completely different
vibe that comes from that.
So many spontaneous
acts of love, so
many spontaneous
taking care of people.
Just the fact that
we're all trying
to love each other as
family, even with--
and that makes the anarchy work.
The anarchy is just miraculous.
There's miracles happening every
moment at a Rainbow Gathering.
Because that's the assumption
of what we're supposed to do.
It's not the assumption that we
take care of ourselves first.
It's the assumption that we
take care of the family first.
>> (SINGING) Bless the people.
Bless the people.
>> Out there in the real world,
if the cooperation was there,
everything would go so smoothly,
and construction, and building.
This whole thing
to come together
is just simply amazing.
Complete freedom.
And I live for it.
Look at this.
You can't buy this.
All the money in the world,
you couldn't buy this.
>> (SINGING) Bless the people.
Bless the people.
[CRICKETS CHIRPING]
>> This year is my 20th
gathering in a row that
I've made it to a
national gathering.
This is the spiritual center
of my life every year.
The energy of this family
that comes together
in prayer on the
4th of July, it's
like nothing else
I've ever experienced.
And if there's any meaning
to the First Amendment
of the Constitution, it's
that we have the right
to assemble if this is
the spirit that moves us,
just as anyone else has a right
to follow their spirit as well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Hallelujah.
Hallelujah.
Hallelu--
>> My overall experience
of the place is consensus.
That we don't need to all
agree, but if it's a good idea
somebody has, it catches on.
Doesn't have to be a democracy
where we vote everything
in and go by the majority.
We really pass an idea around.
If it works, then it will live.
And if it doesn't
work, it will die.
And consensus is the message
that I get from this place
mostly.
That it really doesn't
have to be structure.
We don't have to have authority.
It's going to work.
If it's true, it's
going to work.
If it isn't true, it's
not going to work.
>> (SINGING) Hallelujah.
Hallelujah.
Hallelu--
>> Every day is a
little different,
but it's basically just trying
to leave the forest better when
we leave than when we get here.
And a lot of people
are still learning,
so there's a lot of stuff gets
left behind, but more and more
people plugging in, just
more-- or two people picking up
a piece of trash, or carrying
out what they brought in,
and we make all the difference.
>> (SINGING) Hallelujah.
Hallelujah.
[LAUGHTER AND SCREAMING]
[LIGHT GUITAR MUSIC]
>> (SINGING) You are my mother.
You're my father.
You're my love,
you are my friends.
You're the beginning.
You are the center.
And you are beyond
the [INAUDIBLE]..
You are the colors
of the rainbow.
You're the pure
white light in me.
You are the rivers.
You are the mountains, Lord.
You are the sights.
You are the sea.
And I love you so.
You help me see.
See you in all, is
to see you in me.
I'm in you, and you're in me.
>> There are those who--
their natural proclivity of
trying to understand something
is to see it and react to it as
if it were about tribal, if it
were about religion.
But Rainbow respects
all spiritual paths.
And there are religions here.
People come with their camps.
At this gathering, there's
three Christian camps.
There's three Krishna camps.
There's two Hebrew camps.
But there's nobody
in charge here.
I think it's really
wonderful when you have--
like our dinner circle,
where you can get anywhere
from a couple of hundred
to 6,000 people sitting
in a circle on the earth
to share a meal together.
And there are 30 different
kitchens providing the food,
and some of those
kitchens are Krishnas,
kitchens are Christians.
And they're all-- everybody's
going around just making sure
that the people get fed.
It's all about
sharing in the feast.
And that's what a Rainbow
Gathering really is.
It's more of like
a spiritual feast.
>> (SINGING) --and you're in me.
And I love you so.
You help me see.
>> I've been a street
medic at protests.
And that's how I started
doing some of this stuff,
and started introducing
herbal medicine,
and got wilderness first
responder training,
and EMT training.
>> (SINGING) I love you so.
>> I really think that it's one
of the best examples I've seen
of true anarchism in the idea
of mutual aid and no hierarchy
in not a dogmatic sort
of politicized way,
but just doing it.
It can be kind of
crazy, a little chaotic.
But it's pretty juicy.
It's pretty fun.
>> (SINGING) I'm in
you and you're in me.
[LIVELY MUSIC]
>> (SINGING)
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
[CHATTER]
>> Want to wave?
[CHUCKLES]
>> OK, well, you
can help me, then.
I'll let you do it. 'Cause
I'm not good with it.
>> R-I-L-L-E.
>> I can't spell
the whole thing.
What's your favorite color?
Blue?
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> Om.
Om.
[CHEERING]
[LIVELY DRUMS MUSIC]
>> [LAUGHING]
>> All right, who
needs watermelon?
Get some watermelon right here.
[UPBEAT DRUMS MUSIC]
>> (SINGING) -- and if you'd
go like to go for a ride,
we'll go so high.
And if you got the faith,
we'll climb up to the sky.
And the [INAUDIBLE]
And as the spirit
grows, He will lift us higher.
And as the spirit grows,
He will lift us higher.
Our wagon wheels
keep rolling on.
[TRIBAL DRUMS MUSIC]
[LIVELY GUITAR MUSIC]
>> (SINGING) Dance,
gypsies, dance.
Sing, gypsies, sing.
Life is for loving,
let freedom ring.
Sing, gypsies, sing.
Dance, gypsies, dance.
Life is for love and romance.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
[LIVELY DRUMS MUSIC]
[WHOOPING]
>> 'Cause we bring a whole lot
of different perspectives about
what it is to be human beings.
And we're here trying to
set up an experiment for how
we can interact better, how
we can work together better,
how we can try and build a
safer, saner, happier world.
And the energy that
we bring, we hope
bleeds out into the community,
and that you can learn from us,
and that we can learn
from wherever we go.
And we're here to learn to
love each other and cooperate.
And it isn't always easy, and it
isn't always clean and perfect.
But this is what
this is about, is
learning how to live
in a happier world
and work together better.
>> This whole thing is
very, very touching.
It's a heart song road event.
I enjoy the camaraderie.
I enjoy that it's a getting
together of an instant village
to live in peace
for a whole week.
To touch on people,
and enlighten people
to be enlightened.
To find that little
something that you need,
and go back home and be able
to get back into your routine
and pass the love onto others.
>> It's become a part of
my spiritual practice.
If I don't do it,
if I miss a year--
which I've missed a couple--
my life just doesn't go as well
as if I'm here with my family.
>> Well, actually, this is my
first gathering, and it's like,
to me, rainbow
means togetherness.
Unity.
Everyone's family here.
I mean, there's a
couple spats, you know,
but we still love each other.
We're all together, and
we're one, and we're whole.
And now I'm not going to want
to go back to my regular life.
[SERENE MUSIC]
>> Well, it's a really beautiful
thing that goes on here.
It is totally magical at
the Rainbow Gathering.
People bring all good things,
whether it's Tea Here,
a teahouse my wife founded, Brew
Ha-Ha, or Love 'n Ovens, eating
great pizza, and people
learning to live cooperatively.
Digging holes that
need to be dug,
and doing the work that needs
to be done, carrying in supply.
I really like that we can
gather in peace and pray
for world peace on
the 4th of July.
It's a beautiful thing.
[GUITAR MUSIC]
>> For me, it's just a place
of spiritual people looking
to learn from each other,
and to enjoy the woods,
and enjoy each other.
[MUSIC - "LONG TIME SUN"]
>> (SINGING) May the
long-time sun shine upon you.
All love surround you.
And the pure, pure light
within you guide your way home.
Sisters to the brothers.
May the long-time
sun shine upon you.
All love surround you.
And the pure, pure light
within you guide your way home.
And brothers to the sisters.
May the long-time
sun shine upon you.
All love surround you.
And the pure, pure light
within you guide your--
>> Welcome home!
It's actually on an
outrageous videotape
that's been going
all around the world.
It's called the
"Rainbow Spirit" video.
Some of you may have seen, huh?
[CHEERING]
All right.
Well, tonight, if you got
arrested and went to jail,
and you said, when they asked
you, what was your religion,
you said Rainbow.
And every Sunday, instead of
going to church, or synagogue,
you got to go into a
room with a video machine
and listen to the
"Rainbow Spirit" video
and be at the Rainbow Gathering.
[CHEERING]
So if you could help for
this particular show,
could you please turn
on all your flashlights?
Because you are
our lighting crew.
On, on.
Shine flashlights on--
[CHEERING]
>> Well, last night
was the variety show.
You tend to get a
lot of the folks who
are professional musicians
from the gathering
to come through, such
as the Rainbow Gypsies,
Fantuzzi, numerous other groups.
But some of the most special
things you'll find on the stage
are things like folks who
have never in their lives
getting onstage in
front of anyone,
and getting a standing
ovation from 1,000 people.
It's really the gems are the
little moments in between.
But there are some
fantastic performers,
musicians-- everything dancers,
actors, musicians, poets.
Everything you can imagine.
[GUITAR MUSIC]
>> (SINGING) Humble ourselves.
I say we got to
humble ourselves.
Whoa.
Humble ourselves.
Humble yourself in the
sight of your sister.
sight of your brother.
Humble yourself in the
sight of the babies.
Humble yourself in
the sight of Jah-Jah.
Humble yourself.
Get ready.
For the change.
We shall lift each other
up higher and higher.
We shall lift each other up.
We shall lift each other
up higher and higher.
We shall lift each other up.
We shall--
We're sending our love out to
the four corners of the Earth.
--higher and higher.
We shall lift--
We want them to
feel us right now.
Remember, go where there's
darkness and despair
and show that you care.
We shall lift each other up.
Yeah, that's right!
Come on!
We shall lift each other
up higher and higher.
We shall lift each other up.
We shall lift each other
up higher and higher.
We shall lift each other up.
We shall lift each other
up higher and higher.
We shall lift each other up.
We shall lift each other
up higher and higher.
We shall lift each other up, up,
up, up, up, up, up, up, up, up,
up.
[CHATTER]
[FLUTE MUSIC]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
[LIVELY GUITAR MUSIC]
>> It's really wonderful.
We met up with a
couple of families
from home with kids
his age, and we
camped at the kiddie village,
and it was just lovely.
It was a great
camping experience.
>> (SINGING) Day by day,
every day, moment by moment,
give thanks and praise.
Day by day--
>> There ain't no lazy
people in the Rainbow.
There are people come here
who just take the ride.
But then there's
all the rest of us.
The young people who learn
one thing, that our mantra is
peace, we win.
Look after the land.
Look after the people.
Live lightly on the land.
Clean it up and take
it away when you go.
>> (SINGING) Ooh.
Ooh.
Uh-huh.
Day by day, every day, moment by
moment, give thanks and praise.
>> Remember, every one of those
brothers and sisters out there
who come home, consider this.
Respect is our way.
Ho.
So it's real important
to take everything out.
Trash, everything
that we bring in.
We're already affecting the
land by trampling on it.
We might as well make sure we
take everything out with us.
>> Leave it how you found it.
>> Yeah.
Leave it better
than you found it.
>> Leave it better
Leave yourself better than
you found yourself too.